=== Payment Tokenization Guide ===

White Paper 
Tokenization: 
Everything You Need to Know 

Contents

Executive summary 

1.  What is tokenization? 

1.1 A definition 

1.2 Tokenization – a brief history 

1.3 How are tokens used? 

1.4 What is the aim of tokenization?  

2. 

Different types of tokens 

2.1 How can tokens be used to protect payments? 

2.2 Tokenization is already here 

2.3 Tokens…a step further 

2.4 When tokens are a step too far…  

3. 

4. 

So who should be the token service provider (TSP)? 

The future of tokenization 

About the author  

About Bell ID 

3 

5 

5

7

8

9

10

12

13

15

16

18

23 

25 

26

2
2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary  

Tokens are used in a number of environments to replace and 

near field communication (NFC) payments (any of the OEM Pays, 

protect the underlying value of credentials. In the payments world, 

and all forms of cloud based payments); as well as being used 

tokenization is primarily used to secure payment card data. This can 

increasingly for secure remote payments in e-commerce/m-

be done using EMVCo Tokenization for card payment transactions 

commerce.  Therefore, the critical question for most issuers is not 

or Payment Card Industry (PCI) Tokenization for card-on-file 

‘if’ to tokenize, but instead ‘where’ to tokenize.  It is important to do 

data, which is stored in merchants’ or acquirers’ systems after a 

this in the most efficient and effective way to support that issuer’s 

transaction is completed.

short, medium and long term strategic goals.

This v is primarily focused on EMVCo Tokenization, although it will 

also address the use of the same underlying security mechanisms 

and technology for use cases beyond bank payment cards. EMVCo 

Tokenization is already a de facto requirement for a number of 

card payment environments: card-on-file (at merchants); mobile 

The critical question for most 
issuers is not ‘if’ to tokenize, 
but instead ‘where’ to tokenize.

3
3

 
US-based issuers of early payment industry tokenization initiatives 

Outside of the US, many issuers can strategically consider 

had very limited (or no) deployment options, since their services 

tokenization from day one. This needs to be done quickly given 

were implemented by the payment networks.  Now, however, 

the accelerating pace of global mobile NFC payments rollout, the 

many issuers want to regain control of their cardholder payments 

increasing frequency of data breaches at merchants and the growth 

processing. The opportunity to deepen their understanding of 

in fraud rates in the rapidly expanding e/m-commerce payments 

cardholder transaction behavior, together with the growing number 

environment.

of payment channels that can be processed as separate token 

domains and the enhanced token controls that can now be applied 

to the process, are all factors that are driving issuers to establish a 

cost effective token processing service before moving to significant 

production volumes.

This white paper looks to inform the reader on 
the subject of tokenization, specifically. What is 
tokenization? How can it be implemented? Why 
is this payment solution getting so much industry 
attention?

For those still relatively new to tokenization, this white paper 

includes valuable references to help readers get to grips with the 

subject, including information on token service providers, token 

vaults and token domains. 

4
4

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
01  
What is  
Tokenization?

1.1  A definition 

The process of tokenization replaces sensitive data with surrogate 

In an EMV® payments context and in simple terms, the EMVCo 

values, i.e. tokens, which remove risk but preserve value to the 

Payment Tokenization Specification for payment cards requires 

business.  These tokens are then used in place of the sensitive data 

the replacement of the card’s primary account number (PAN) with 

throughout the channel ecosystem, or token domain, until they can 

an alternate unique identification number, or ‘token’.  To allow 

be mapped back (de-tokenized), in a secure environment, to the 

this token to be processed over the EMVCo stakeholders’ existing 

original value allowing any subsequent processing or reconciliation 

payments infrastructure, the token must be formatted to look like a 

to take place. 

PAN. This enables transac